Hey guys welcome back to the course so in this lecture we're going to talk about determining whether
or not you should work with an individual freelancer or a firm.
It's probably something you hadn't actually thought about.
What difference does it make right especially if you're new to this.
But let me tell you it actually makes quite a big difference and it really kind of depends on your type
of situation your experience with outsourcing and what exactly you are outsourcing.
So the reason why I bring this up at this point in the course is because probably at this point you
might've been following along and building out your project and listing it and soliciting some people
to build or do whatever it is you're doing and you might have run into a problem which is that you're
looking at bids say you're using up work or e Lanson into platforms or any of the other sources that
we covered for or finding contractors.
You might notice that some people speak a little bit differently sometimes they say we and sometimes
they say I might have also noticed that some people in their profile picture might be a logo or it might
be a person.
So determining whether or not it's a company or a freelancer that's generally pretty easy.
If they send you a logo.
Typically a company now that's not a hundred percent true all the time but 99 percent of the time they're
sending you a logo.
They're a group of people.
If they send you a profile picture then they're probably a freelancer.
As a side note to getting a picture of a person as a freelancer one thing that you should always avoid
is if you have a contractor who is probably on the other side of the world and they send you a photo
of someone that doesn't match what you would assume is their ethnic profile or it looks like it's a
stock photo looks like way too perfect or too planned.
Please avoid that person it's a very strange thing that contractors often do.
I've had contractors on the other side of the world send me stock photos of people and it turns out
that they're celebrities and they didn't even realize.
So avoid that.
But another way you can obviously tell whether or not it's a firm or freelancer look at their language.
They say we or do they really say I.
Now if you used another way of sourcing this then look for whether or not they say attached a resume.
Typically a freelancer is going attach a resume.
A company is probably not going to do that both on a list of portfolio.
And honestly if there's no other way you can tell try to go to if they have a personal web site.
You go there you can tell very quickly.
So let's talk about the pros and cons of using a firm.
So let's talk about why you would use a firm and what are situations and scenarios where you really
wouldn't want to use a firm.
First off what's the first pro when it comes to hiring a firm.
Well one pro that I think a lot of people don't actually realize is that groups and firms are typically
more capable.
So now you might think to yourself what does it matter.
I'm only hiring one or two people at that firm that actually matters quite a bit.
In most cases where you're contracting out work whether it's a mobile application or whatever typically
it's going to involve multiple expertise.
And what I mean by that is like say you're building on a mobile application you might need someone who
understands how to work with swift or Java so they can program it for say IRS but you also might need
someone who can deal with the graphic interface of the actual application itself.
Now often that someone can do both.
That is true but it's also often the case that those are two separate expertise.
So now our group is more likely to have both those expertise within their actual staff and that actually
is an important distinction.
So outsprint correct we get asked to do projects all the time that have multiple expertise lets say
an application that incorporates some other specific or obscure framework or technology.
We're actually in a better position than a freelancer because we have other people who work for the
company that have expertise in some of those other sections so when we run into a problem we can always
access that other person and get a quick on the spot consultation.
Groups have that advantage now.
Rarely is the case that you have something that only has a single expertise.
But it is possible it is possible that what you're doing is small enough that that person probably has
all the skills you need and so you don't benefit from this from a group but in most cases this is helpful.
The biggest thing is it makes it such that your project will go faster because when they run into a
roadblock they can get past it faster and they're more likely to figure it out where a lot of times
the freelancer they might not actually know how to solve it or another pro about groups is that they
can actually shift the load of work as they're working on your project.
So say that you hire them to build out something for you.
Now they might assume or assign a one person as your lead developer.
That person is dedicated to your project much like a freelancer would.
But what happens if person say get sick well with a group there's a very good chance they can offload
work they can shift the load if anything comes up.
So let's say the person working on their project gets sick gets you know injured anything just doesn't
show up there's a problem.
There's a very good chance that someone else is ready who can pick up the load.
That's just a thing with groups especially with development groups web development design groups.
There's always someone who has some extra time because projects don't fit together perfectly with the
40 hour week schedule someone is always available to pick up slack if it's the case.
Now the biggest pro for working with the firm is actually what's called a management law here.
I'm sure you might be familiar with what I'm talking about what I mean is that when you hire a firm
there's going to be some sort of a project manager or a business manager.
Typically the person you reached out to you probably wasn't the person who actually going to be doing
the work.
It's the person who's in charge of customer client satisfaction.
It's the person that probably deals with finding leads and processing the accounts.
Now what does that mean for you and your project that means that when you work with the firm There's
always going to be someone that is looking over the project keeping tabs on where it is.
It means that there's someone there who's probably in charge of keeping the quality high and making
sure that your deadlines get done on time if something goes wrong.
Say one of your workers is just behind schedule.
You have recourse for that.
You could always point that information towards the person who's in charge of the project or the business
manager and that's a way that you can apply pressure to speed things along or kind of voice any concerns
that you're having.
Management layers also provide quite a bit of guidance a lot of them will give you insight and expertise
that you wouldn't necessarily have if you're just working with the individual person that's doing your
work.
They also allow you to spend less time on your project.
You hire a freelancer you're going to need to do your check ups yourself you're going to need to work
with them to make sure that they hit deadlines make sure that the quality is high and check in with
them from time to time and that falls on you.
But with a group that has a management layer you have to do less and less so if you're more comfortable
doing less work.
I would say that probably going with a firm is is is a more advantageous situation for you.
Now let's talk about the cons of working with a firm.
Now the cons of working in the firm are actually it's kind of the flip side of the pros that I just
introduce So we talked about how they can offload work in times of need.
Well often what happens with the firm is that they will do that and you will not be aware of that it's
happening.
There's a certain temptation with groups to shift the load around to wherever it's convenient to make
room for more important clients or make room so that they can close sales with other clients.
Now that is usually a detriment to your project and you might not be aware of it happening now if you're
doing a web or mobile application typically you're going to have what's called a lead developer a lead
developer is going to be the person who owns your project.
They know everything about it.
They understand every single piece of your codebase.
Now if a firm is tempted to offload work they might switch that person off to another project and have
someone fill their shoes.
That is almost always a problem for your code quality and your project quality because the person coming
in cannot possibly know the project as well as the person who just left because firms and projects typically
will work with some kind of a specialist model where someone is the specialist on your project or the
lead on your project.
Then when they offload or they shift work between employees or staff members that can actually be a
problem.
So obviously the way that you remedy this is you look for your people are thorough.
When you look through their portfolio and you look at the final kind of in PS So he's obviously helpful
to talk to people directly to talk to the clients that these firms have worked with.
But it's something to keep in mind that this could happen.
Now another con of working with a firm is that you might not get the individualized attention that you
need for your project.
You might also kind of have an issue where the people that you talk with directly probably the project
manager or the business manager might not understand your project on a technical level as well as they
should.
Now keep in mind project managers business managers they have to spread their time between you and probably
a ton of other projects that have to keep the lights on at their firms so they can't be an expert in
everything that you're talking about and they can't necessarily give you a large amount of their attention
and time like you would usually expect from a freelancer.
Now also it's kind of a difficult thing in the sense that because a project manager they might not be
technical you could be the case that you might have some communication issues where you can't get the
answers that you want from a business manager.
But he didn't speak to the directly to the person that's doing the work.
Another con with working in the firm is that when you look at their portfolio it can be a little bit
tricky because when you go and hire them for a project you're not a hundred percent guaranteed to the
employee that you saw are associated with one of their portfolio items so say there is a Web site they
built that thing is just beautiful and you make your decision to use them based off of that portfolio
item.
Now the person who made that it's very possible that they're not even at the firm anymore.
They could be long gone or they could be there and you might not get access to them.
Now keep in mind firms have to on board new users new designers developers whatever it is that you're
using.
So there's a varying degree of veterans sea and expertise in the groups you don't always know exactly
what you're going to get.
Now here's the biggest con of them all firms are more expensive.
They're inherently more expensive because of the biggest pro that we mentioned they have a management
layer.
Those people you deal with project managers business managers they have their own salaries.
So when you get a project estimate or even a per hour estimate baked into that costs will include some
management cost labor.
But also you need to keep in mind that since it's a business they are doing it for some reason and there's
probably a profit margin included in that.
Now it's impossible to tell how much of your estimate is a profit margin but safe to say that at least
some of it is actually their margin.
Firms have to advertise themselves firms often have very large marketing budgets.
Those things get paid for by raising the price of the actual work they end up doing.
So inherently firms are going to be more expensive and like any contract relationship there's going
to be a negative incentive where the contractor is going to want to cut costs.
The biggest difference between a freelancer cutting costs and a firm cutting costs is that firms can
cut costs in many different ways that you would not even be aware of because you don't even know exactly
what goes into the price that you're giving you.
So they could very easily cut costs in areas that you are not even aware of.
So that could be an issue.
Typically transparency is harder with a firm now freelancers on the flip side of this.
There are totally different beast.
A freelancer really is as good as your relationship with them.
Now finding someone who's capable is just as important as finding someone that you can communicate with
effectively.
But the pros are a freelancer.
They're probably what you think with a little bit of surprises.
Now the pros of working with a freelancer they're very similar to the opposite of what you'd expect
with a firm now with freelancers.
They are inherently cheaper.
You are only paying for them.
And what exactly they think their time is worth.
The Perros also are that if you look at their portfolio you know exactly who made that.
So when you hire them you know exactly what you're getting.
Another pro is that freelancers are easier to haggle with.
Firms have kind of a set in stone way that they work.
They usually just have a price that they charge and it's very hard to get them to move because they
have to pay for so many different things.
But a freelancer you really can work with them.
And typically if a freelancer I'd say had 40 hours a week of work they would charge a lot less than
what they're quoting you but they quote you that because they simply do not work 40 hours or work 40
hours a week with billable hours they might be working 40 hours a week.
But it's not always going to be paid.
Now obviously that's a generalization.
Some freelancers are very popular and very well established and so maybe they're overflowing with work.
But it's typically the case that they like to compensate for the time they are not getting paid by raising
the price during the times in which they are getting paid.
So there's always a little room to wiggle because for them it's not worth spending time closing deals
talking about contracts talking about money.
They don't make money when they're trying to fish in contracts and really make money when they're actually
doing them and getting paid for them.
Another pro is that in general they're less busy just in general and that's simply because someone is
a freelancer they spend most of their time and they try to spend most of their time working on whatever
it is there an expert at whatever it is that they do freelance work for.
Now a firm again could have someone that's literally dedicated to finding projects.
So in general a freelancer just getting a lot more flexible.
They generally have pockets of hours that are available all the time.
That means that if you have more of a loose project timeline much easier to work with a freelancer.
Now the cons are obviously related to what we said kind of previously in the firm section.
Now a freelancer one of the biggest cons is what happens if they get sick.
What happens if they disappear what happens if they lose motivation they're only one person so if that
happened your project could literally come to a standstill.
Another con is kind of related to what we talked about as a benefit to a firm in that a freelancer could
run into a problem that they cannot solve.
Freelancers do not always have extensive networks.
People that they can get consulting from and people they can ask for help when they hit a snag.
Again a lot of projects require multiple expertise so a freelancer is more likely to run into something
they do not know.
Because again there are only one person that can mean for your project slower delivery times and potentially
they could run into a problem that's completely unsolvable.
So those are the pros and cons working with the firm working with a freelancer.
They do actually end up making quite a big of a difference.
I think the biggest thing you should pay attention to freelancers are cheaper firms are more expensive
freelancers going require a lot more time for you.
Firms are going to require a lot less time for you.
Typically this is not always true but if you had to go for an average firms do deliver better work on
average because they have management layer and they also have more expertise spread than a freelancer.
And that obviously is how they justify how much they charge it is usually more than a freelancer.
There are some general questions that you should ask yourself when you're trying to determine what's
a better fit for you firm or freelancer.
So first off is your project time sensitive.
Now you're listening before you can probably figure out which one is better for that because firms can
shift load and because firms have larger reputations they're probably a better choice if you are very
time sensitive project.
What I mean by that is if you have a project and you need it by a certain date and it's not ready by
a certain date how big of a pain or a pain event or problem are you going to have.
Now if you have a looser timeline something you want to build but you don't need to launch it right
this second or get it done right this second.
Freelancers are going to be a much better option for you.
The other question you should ask yourself.
Have you contracted out work before.
How experienced are you working with contracted firms that are outside of your core unit.
If you have more experience you're probably going to be able to handle more of the management and deal
with more of the issues that come up as you go along through the process.
That means that you are probably more fit to work with the freelancer now if you're less experienced
it is the first time you've ever contracted something out it might be the case that you want to work
with the firm because of that management layer that we talked about.
Another question you asked yourself how big is your budget if you have a healthy budget.
You have a budget that is well over what some people have been estimating or ballpark for you then it
might be the case that you can you have the luxury of working with the firm.
Now if you're on a budget that's more tight or maybe you just don't want to spend as much than a freelancer
is probably the better option for you.
The other question you should ask yourself how complicated is your technology.
Does it bring in multiple expertise talked about this previously.
Firms are better at managing multiple expertise.
A lot of times you might want to build something that has different pieces of it that are completely
different technologies.
That's typical of the case where a former are going to perform better.
Now that's not to say a freelancer can't do it.
It just means it might take them more time because they may have to learn something along the way.
I'll give you an example.
We've built a social networking app that's on your phone and it had a very large module where you could
take photographs and apply filters to it.
Now the standard expertise for building an iOS application it's not related to doing say core changes
to your camera.
That's actually something that's called core image core image is something that a developer might specialize
in but it's not something you should expect that every single iOS developer should know.
And the last thing I think you should ask yourself is how involved in the project you want to be.
Do you want to have formal meetings or informal meetings.
How often do you want to check in with your freelancer or your firm or whoever is doing your project.
Freelancers are such the case that they are actually burdened by having constant formal updates.
You check in with them three times a week you're going to see a significant slowdown in your project.
Now firms of the other hand have people who are dedicated to keeping you up to date with what's happening
so you can use as much time as you want from those people.
Really it's up to you it's up to your comfort level.
It's kind of actually up to what you expect to come out of the project.
So hopefully now have some kind of an idea of why someone needs a firm and why someone who's a freelancer
and you should have a decent indication of where your project lies within the kind of continuum and
you should be able to make an educated decision as to who to go forward with.
All right.
I'll see you in the next lecture.